[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology good evening everyone and
welcome to another episode of church
history and theology today is Series 2
episode seven the real Peter the Apostle
to the
Jews I tell you there's probably not
going to be many more controversial
episodes than this one we are going to
be looking into who it is that Peter as
one of the Apostles and founders of the
church is what do we know about him from
scripture what do we know about him from
history and then furthermore what things
have been taught in his name what things
about himself what myths have developed
throughout church history and there are
some significant ones in fact I would
say no single man has had such a discrep
y between who he really was according to
scripture and history and who he has
made out to be by certain traditions of
the church who have long abused his
memory for political and ecclesiastical
gains and so one of my goals tonight is
to show you basically who Peter was what
do we know about him from scripture and
uh the presuppositions that I have on
scripture is that something in scripture
is fully and thoroughly dependable and
what do we know from
history uh those things that are
consistent with scripture are straight
up to be taken without uh much of a
problem and those things that are
inconsistent uh are meant to look into
further uh history is not a perfect
record it's a partial record scripture
is a perfect record and so in rebuilding
this kind of concept of who Peter was
and what his role in the church was we
really have to dig into the scriptures
and dig into the history and what we
find is that there's a great deal
of agreement between scripture and
history and who Peter is now as far as
for later history and the extrapolations
that people make from the mid 2nd
Century onwards especially uh to the um
the massive edifice uh that is laid upon
Peter's shoulders in the 4th Century uh
that is the Roman Church itself the
Roman Catholic Church in the in the wake
of the legal legalization of
Christianity in the 4th Century uh in
the Roman Empire before all of that the
history that we have of Peter and his
role in the church is very consistent
with the New Testament it is really not
until we get to the end of the 2 Century
that it starts going haywire and uh I
want to show you an instance of why that
happened uh and it happened with
misreading a single sentence uh is a
pretty remarkable thing and I want you
to able to see that but before we even
get into all that who is
Peter who is the real Peter and that's
what I want us to focus on this evening
the Peter of scripture and the Peter of
History are the same
person the Peter of later ecclesiastical
histories um uh that we will cover later
I'm going to discuss here towards the
end what I will call uh here the real
Peter and then there the Peter of
fiction the Peter that is real the Peter
of scripture and history agree the
depictions of Peter are fairly clear and
well outlined there are limits to what
we know like all historical studies
there's limits to what the scripture
says it doesn't give us every detail
about Peter but it gives us enough to
recreate the vast swath of his life it
gives us something that is consistent
with what we know from the earliest
Church what we know from the writings of
uh those like Clement um and those like
ignacius um and now Ignatius has a whole
series of problems and issues of his own
writings but we'll leave those off for
another time uh and then the other
references that we have regarding who
Peter was as an apostle as he calls
himself in First Peter 5 an elder of the
church and his role specifically and
very significantly in the Jerusalem
Church and the church in Antioch for a
time and also in the churches of Asia
Minor especially in the
north and so I wanted to lay out to you
what we get regarding Peter and let's
first talk about Peter as a man what is
his
character in the gospels Peter is a
significant example of the extremes of
personality I mean that that really
can't even be overstated the one who's
nicknamed The Rock is also called Satan
in another
passage right the one who is the first
to confess Christ as the Messiah also is
the one who denies him three times the
one who defends him with a sword one
moment abandons him the next next he uh
earlier that evening do not wash my feet
and then upon being corrected by Jesus
saying if I don't wash your feet you'll
have no part of me turns around and says
then wash my head and my hands uh as
well like this whole dichotomy of of
putting his foot in his mouth and
immediately being corrected and then
going out and living life corrected and
well um you you see this with everything
having denied Christ three times he's
given opportunity to respond to Christ
about his love for him three
times um you even see Jesus in the
gospels towards the end there in John
chapter 21 uh prophesying that Peter
will die as a
martyr this this kind of sketch of of
Peter being an
exemplary um person that all of us can
actually understand Peter is very easy
for me to understand he rushes to the
truth uh sometimes haphazardly sometimes
uh quick all the time quickly and
sometimes just
carelessly but then upon finding
correction immediately amends his ways
and then continues on uh the way of
righteousness and almost sometimes
definitely the worst for wear but
recovering well well Jesus finishes off
uh one of the gospels in the Gospel of
John expressing that Peter at the end of
his life uh is going to suffer martyrdom
you can see that in John 2118 and 19 if
you want to go read that in the book of
Acts Peter is
exemplary primarily of Jewish
Christianity now if you saw what I uh
titled this uh entire lesson is the real
Peter the Apostle to the Jews this is a
terminology that is clarifying his role
specifically to the church in Jerusalem
and to the scattered Jews throughout the
world he is the Apostle to the Jews Paul
himself calls himself the Apostle to the
Gentiles they had specifically different
roles and specifically different
Foundation stones to lay Peter's
character is exemplary primarily of
Jewish Christianity which is the first
to recognize Jesus as Messiah the first
to come to Salvation uh they wait in
Jerusalem that is where the coming of
the Holy Spirit was that is where the uh
the first preaching of the on the day of
Pentecost happens and that is by Peter's
own mouth um on behalf of all the
disciples and he was preaching to the
visiting Jews from every corner of the
Known World Peter is the one who in One
Moment uh as as God shows him would not
eat the food the unclean animals uh out
of the sheet that was let down but the
next moment is the one through whom the
salvation of the Gentiles is first
witness in the story of Cornelius and
his household it is it is remarkable
because it is it is God working with one
of the primary leaders of the Church of
the Jews to show them how the salvation
of the Gentiles was going to come in
this mystery that was kept hidden for
long ages now is being shown to them and
it's
confusing in fact they had to hold the
entire Council of Jerusalem something
we're going to spend a whole night on uh
here in the near future uh in Acts
chapter 15 Paul excuse me Peter has has
to come to that and give testimony to
the spread of the Holy Spirit to the
Gentiles in the exact same way that he
fell on the Church of the Jews in Acts
chapter
2 Peter is reasoning with them at acts
15 at the Jerusalem Council that the
spirit of God is Not relegated to the
Jewish Church
alone and in fact Gentiles do not have
to become Jews as they ended up writing
out in order for them to become
Christians in the Epistles of the New
Testament Peter is exemplary of humble
and fallible leadership he is the one
who is corrected by the younger Apostle
Paul for his hypocrisy and his ministry
in Jewish Gentile Christians and their
relations again Peter quickly running to
something having a tradition is
corrected and then quickly corrects
himself and
repents he is the one who writes in
First Peter to Gentile Christians
paralleling them with Israel as
dispersed throughout the world as a
Wilderness The Rock calling all
Christians living stones in 1 Peter 2 a
fellow Elder in 1 Peter 5 who encourages
humble and devout character parameters
for those who lead the church that it
should not be for unjust gain that it
should not be to Lord over a power over
some somebody else or any such thing in
fact if you want to be challenged in how
you view your responsibility as a church
leader go read first Peter 5 in his
description of the elders
responsibilities there pretty remarkable
stuff he like the other Apostles lived
during the writings of the New Testament
texts they were able to identify them as
inspired alongside the testimony of the
New Testament prophets that we discussed
in uh episode 6 he does this for Paul's
writings in second Peter chapter 3 he
refers to Paul's writings as
scripture it's
important Peter's character is really
set up to be somebody that's quite
relatable he is somebody who understands
what his foot tastes like and
understands what eating crow tastes like
repentance and getting back up again and
starting again he knows what denial is
like he knows what repentance is like he
knows the limits of his love he knows
the limits of his character he knows the
limits of everything that he
has what I want you to
do is stick with me through the next
section here I want to lay out the
chronology of Peter's Life as we were
expressed to it in the book of Acts and
in the scriptures to follow and in
history I wanted to combine them all
together and I'm going to follow along a
chronology that we have in the church
history so I'm not going to walk through
the Gospels or anything like that but
we'll start at Pentecost and we're going
to move forward pretty quickly um
because throughout his life throughout
the uh what is presented to us in the
books of uh acts and in the Epistles and
then in the earliest parts of the church
we get a pretty interesting role of what
exactly Peter was up to in the 30 to 35
years of ministry he had I want you to
see this he begins at Pentecost which is
in the year 30 or 33 ad depending on how
you date the death of Christ both of
them have good Arguments for them I'm
not going to settle on one or the other
at this point but Pentecost would be in
the weeks to follow so it's going to be
in the year 30 or 33 ad the rest of the
book of Acts has a huge focus on him uh
until he essentially vanishes um after
chapter 12 and then appears back for
chapter 15 and then we kind of don't see
him again um his uh main role and
functioning
is to be found in the city of Jerusalem
and the surrounding cities Samaria L
japa he served as an elder and as an
apostle mainly in the book of Acts in
these early years as an apostle but as
Elders were founded in the churches he
actually served as one of them he was
qualified to do so because he was
married he had children as far as we
understand um and now that comes from a
later tradition so there's only so much
we can uh extrapolate about that um and
he met the qualifications for an elder
and so he actually fulfilled that role
in uh in the church most likely in the
church in Jerusalem um it's possible
that he also did so in Antioch but
Jerusalem almost for sure uh at least in
the early years the Holy Spirit used him
for some very unusual
Miracles well sometimes his shadow would
pass over somebody and they would be
healed uh remarkable stuff uh the Holy
Spirit used them for apologetic defense
to the s hedrin uh and the Jews at large
of the Christian faith encouraging them
uh and encouraging Christians to do so
we find he even writes towards the end
of his life in 1 Peter 3 uh that we
should always be ready to give a defense
for the hope uh for the reason for the
hope that is within us uh with
gentleness and with reverence right and
he began a long tradition of
evangelizing the Jews and he saw it as
necessary that they come to the
knowledge that the Messiah has come
Jesus has come and there needs to be a
transfer there needs to be a defense
made so that evangelizing the Jews could
take
place when we can actually settle down
on the years about the year 43 or 44
it's kind of hard to determine which
some 10 to 14 years after Pentecost
Peter was imprisoned by Herod a grippa
the first Herod was trying to Garner
favor with the Jews by persecuting their
biggest annoyance and that is the
growing Church of Jesus Christ in the
city of Jerusalem and so Herod a grippa
uh began by persecuting this new sect
trying to Garner favor with the Jews
James the brother of John the Apostle
basically as Peter James and John that
James was beheaded at this time he is
considered the first martyr of the
church uh with regards to uh leaders
like this obviously we have someone like
Steven as well um and
uh yeah after being
released exuse excuse me not released
Peter was not released Peter was uh
released from prison by an Angel if you
remember that story um Peter and his
wife began a series of missionary
Journeys around Jerusalem in the whole
area of uh of Israel and Palestine uh
proper um we find him again returning
back to Jerusalem in the year 50 we find
him in Jerusalem attending the Jerusalem
Council it's really obvious from the
text uh and the need of his testimony
regarding the salvation of Cornelius
which had taken place about 10 11 years
beforehand uh that he had been absent
from Jerusalem for these interim years
where we don't know but we do know that
uh after the release from prison uh back
that we discuss in verse in in year 44
uh in Acts 12:7 it just simply says that
he he told all these things uh let's see
it says MOS in to them with his hands to
be silent he described to them how the
Lord had brought him out of the prison
and he said tell these things to James
that's not James the Apostle he was just
martyred James the Lord's brother and to
the brothers and then Peter departed and
went to another place that's is that's
as specific as we get so for six years
we have Peter going to another place so
we know he wasn't in
Jerusalem but then he comes back to
Jerusalem in the year 50 ad it does seem
that his involvement in the surrounding
areas whether it was Antioch doesn't
seem yet but it does seem that parts of
Samaria maybe in japa as well again we
don't really know exactly where he was
for those years we do know that it
wasn't Jerusalem uh he went to another
place for a few years and then came back
to
Jerusalem uh for the Jerusalem Council
now in the year 51 ad the very next year
we find Peter in Antioch and that's
where his confrontation with Paul that's
described in Galatians 2 takes place
and after that it seems due to his
familiarity with the churches in Asia
Minor in First Peter uh that he and his
wife continued on missionary Journeys
throughout Asia Minor for the next 10
years or so from about the year 51 ad
until the early
60s um we between 58 and
63 we have indications that he was still
a traveling missionary throughout Asia
Minor so this may have extended along to
about 10 or 12 years sometime during the
end of that according to multiple
sources in early history he and his wife
both arrived in the city of Rome right
around the year
63 outside the testimony of scripture
it's the best that I can reconstruct is
this after 63 we find him in the city of
Rome the capital of the
Empire he is seen preaching the gospel
and likely penned first Peter shortly
after his arrival and the neronian
persecution breaks out if you recall
correctly from history Nero and his
persecution was not uh broadly
understood by uh the entire Empire that
was relegated largely to the city of
Rome and the um the the persecution of
the church there uh his persecution of
the church broke out in July of the year
64 uh and when that happens it continues
on some account say for two years some
say for four we don't really know but
somewhere in there the neronian
persecution took the lives of both Peter
and Paul by the way who happen to be in
Rome at the same time uh that neonian
persecution of the church in the city of
Rome it broke out continued probably
until about
68 um and during this time that Peter is
in Rome from 63 to whenever he dies
whether it's 65 or 66 or 67 or
68 whenever he does he writes both both
first Peter and second
Peter first Peter and second Peter
really show us the heart of who Peter
is First Peter opens up and he writes to
the dispersed Gentile Christians
throughout the world he says
specifically to these churches in Asia
Minor that I argue he and his wife were
serving as itinerate missionaries among
whether as Elders whether whether he was
as an elder or uh a greater stolic role
or not we do not know uh for those 10 to
12 years we just don't have anything
outside of what he writes but his
familiarity with those churches in First
Peter that he writes from Rome I don't
think there's really any doubt that he
writes that from Rome based on how he uh
refers to it as Babylon which is very
early uh Christian writing for referring
to that he writes from Rome um there
before the neronian persecution breaks
out we don't know why he's visiting Rome
in 63 we don't know
um but he finds himself there at that
time and then he writes out to them and
speaks to them about suffering and
persecution fiery trials and things that
are going to go south it it really helps
to understand first Peter to understand
that context when he's coming to Rome it
is obvious that the relationship between
the Roman Emperor and the Christians is
strained um the fire in Rome hasn't
begun yet but the persecution and
everything else it it's it's able to be
seen on the forecast you can see that in
First Peter when he's writing that don't
don't be surprised when the fiery trial
comes upon you as if something strange
were happening to you he actually
expresses to them that their Clarity of
mind their role in the world their role
in the church these things are simply
part of their responsibility the
suffering is part of our gift as
Christians Walking In The Light of
Christ and walking in the way of the
cross his reasoning throughout it is
remarkable he covers all manners of
sufferings whether you are uh a slave
whether you're a Freeman whether you are
um a husband or a wife or children or
whatever the case may be your
responsibility to all these roles in
people's lives and in culture at at
large is covered in First Peter it's
really a remarkable text and he he
finishes It Off by explaining to
everybody of this this humble
honest devoted to
Christ walking with one another in the
fear of God leadership of the church
that's first Peter 5 uh God oppose
opposes the proud and gives grace to the
humble that that entire structure of the
way he sees it should sit high in our
mind well he dies somewhere between 64
and 68 ad uh and right before he does
that he writes second
Peter he states there plainly that he
knows that he will soon be put to death
whether that means he was already
arrested alongside
Paul or whether that he uh was aware of
the persecution that was breaking out in
Rome and he was decided not to
leave
um in fact we know that he and Paul were
in Rome at the same time at this time
but both of them arrested most likely uh
imprisoned together we don't actually
know exactly that but there's a lot of
depth then to Peter's insistence at the
end of second Peter that Paul's letters
are
scripture uh he is there meaning that
Paul and Peter both knew what they were
writing with scripture which is still
just mind-blowing to
me
well the end of this chronology takes
place at the end of his life Paul Peter
and Peter's wife according to tradition
are all martyred in Rome before 68
ad according to a later tradition it
takes place on June 29th which by our uh
my current uh was last month uh I'm
recording at the end of July Paul was
beheaded Peter's wife was put to Death
Before Peter in front of him um who
according to Clement of Alexandria he
witnessed her death and encouraged her
with his final words to her which were
remember the
Lord Peter was then crucified some say
upside down but we do not fully know uh
outside of the city of
Rome now that chronology teaches us a
lot of things about who Peter is who he
was what his role in the church was he
had a tremendous focus on the Lord he
had a tremendous focus on the prophecy
of God being fulfilled a tremendous
focus on the grace of God going out into
the world his role among the Jews um are
are
simply uh unparalleled his role in the
church in Jerusalem uh maybe only
overshadowed by James the Lord's
brother's role uh in the years after
that it's fascinating to me how humble
this rough Gruff fisherman from Galilee
became towards the end of his life and
as he walked with the Lord the tone with
which he writes in first and 2 Peter is
simply
remarkable the way he lays out the
gospel the way he talks about our hope
that is set in heaven
unfadable that which cannot pass away
that is kept in heaven for us this this
Redemption that Angels long to look into
this this Clarity of the scriptures that
have taught us the the milk of the word
now we desire more this this this
discussing of us as the temple of God
built on the foundation stones of the
the the apostles and the
prophets Christ himself being the Chief
Cornerstone and all of us are living
stones it's reflected in the early
church this this concept that even as
Christ said to Peter you are Petro you
are the Rock You Are The Rock on which I
will build my church now a lot of people
we'll talk about that verse in just a
second but as the early church well
understood that rock is just symbolic of
the entire
church of the entire Apostolic Church of
the entire church to follow as Peter
himself refers to everyone as living
stones the whole point is that Christ
himself is the rock as he identifies him
his own self in Matthew chapter 7 and
that the body of Christ the entirety of
the church is also the rock as well as
exemplified in Peter in his
identification of who Christ is and in
the further expressions of these things
the keys of heaven and all this being
given to all the apostles
that is not unclear in the rest of
scripture well that gives us something
else doesn't
it everyone knows that as soon as you
start discussing
Peter there's a tremendous amount of
things that fill our
mind you can say the Apostle
Peter uh in one breath so many things
come to people's minds and so it it
stands to me to also cover not only the
Peter of scripture and history the
actual Peter that existed of which I
gave you nearly everything we
know but there is a Peter
fiction
and this is something you cannot avoid
when talking about Peter uh the Apostle
because he is simply a grand um example
of humility and of care for the church
and of a
direct um understanding of his own
fallibility and weaknesses
ironically um one whose fallible nature
is put on display more than anyone else
uh in the apostolic um Church
I will have to say that the reason I
call this the Peter of fiction is that
no single man has had more represent
misrepresentations and anachronistic
lies told about him than Peter it's very
similar to Mary who she would be the
single woman who has had more
misrepresentations and anachronistic
lies told about her um and she will have
an entire evening devoted to her as
well the misrepresent
ations about Peter took hold very early
on um second century mid second century
what I would say the honest mistakes and
late 2nd Century would be the uh adding
more honest mistakes together with other
honest mistakes leading
to
extrapolations by the time we get to the
thirr century uh there's a lot of
misunderstandings regarding Peter that
are just commonplace
and by the time we get to the 4th
Century the abuses taken out in his name
uh to found something that just has no
value uh or no uh origin in scripture or
in history is pretty remarkable I wanted
to depict it with one example uh this
this evening I'm going to show that to
you in just a little while but I wanted
to talk to you about some of the
misrepresentations right and uh the
elephant in the room here is the Roman
Catholic Church's view of
Peter um
the
entire Monumental
structure of the Roman Catholic
Church this is not even an overstatement
is
100%
dependent on the apostolic
episcopacy of Peter in
Rome every single thing that has ever
been developed in the Roman church every
single Doctrine every single claim claim
to legitimacy to authority to
Primacy to Apostolic succession to Peter
as the progenitor of their papacy
everything that is this Monumental
structure all depends on
Peter and the real problem is that
everything about Peter that is said to
be the base of this is
fiction and it's demonstrably
fiction and yet the edifice still
stands without his episcopacy they do
not have Peter is the progenitor of
their
papacy or any legitimate Apostolic
succession they do not have any unique
Authority they do not have any
specific Primacy of
Authority or anything else they claim in
fact every development that Rome has
added to the scriptures is dependent on
a historical
falsity if you notice in the chronology
I gave you regarding the life of Peter
nowhere in there is he in Rome before
63 ever there is zero indication of that
and I know I know if you're Catholic and
you're you love your uh church history
and stuff you already got quotes by arus
quotes by Jerome quotes by the I'm going
to cover those in a
second but here what I'm saying saying
for just a second and stick with me on
this we have zero historical
indication evidence that has not already
been thoroughly refuted by things we
have discovered that Peter was ever in
Rome before
63 the church in Rome was
wellestablished by the year 63 for
decades Paul had a huge hand hand in it
as
well this concept that Peter was the
founder of the church in Rome uh is not
true on any level whatsoever that is
unique right the only reference that we
have to Peter's involvement with Rome
would be that there were visitors from
Rome that were Jews and
Gentiles uh in Jerusalem on the day of
Pentecost there were visitors from Rome
and they heard Paul's sermon that's it
that's it there's nothing else nothing
else and there was people from every
nation in their extended worldview
wherever they could be coming
from and so if you want to count that as
the founding of the church in Rome or
you want to count that as the as Peter's
role as the founding of it you're going
to have to extend that to every other
Church everywhere among the dispersed
Jews fine Peter played a significant
role on the day of Pentecost it's
remarkable it's incredible I love his
sermon it's one of my favorites his
whole use of Joel to is mind-blowing I
love it but that has absolutely nothing
to do with establishing a papacy or that
he became the bishop of Rome or any of
these other things his role there was
not the founder of the church in Rome it
is an
exaggeration uh from his indirect
preaching of the visitors of Rome in
Acts chap 2:10 at Pentecost that people
claim for this there's others that claim
that he actually came to Rome and
founded this the church in Rome in the
year 40
ad uh completely destroying the entire
timeline we have in the book of Acts but
it
comes it comes from uh a basis of an
understanding that Peter served in Rome
for 20 or 25 years as the bishop of
Rome now I'm going to cover this for
just a second actually for quite a
little bit longer than a second because
it's so Central to the claims that I'm
going to assume uh and I'm going to
presume you understand to be false
claims in the in the months and years to
come as we cover this as it grows and
grows way past whoever Peter was uh into
something that people need him to be in
order to prove who they
are so I want you to see this one
the the entire edifice of Rome relies on
the episcopacy of Peter relies on him
being the bishop of
Rome the entire concept that he was the
bishop of Rome is based in dating the
arrival of a man named Simon
Magus remember Simon maggus Acts chapter
8 we discussed him a little bit when we
were talking about um when we were
talking about Philip the Evangelist he
was going to Samaria and he refuted uh
Simon Magus uh and there was all these
Miracles being done and Simon's like my
goodness that's incredible and Peter and
John come down from Jerusalem and uh
Simon tries to you know purchase the
holy spirit in a certain way and Simon
and Peter rebukes him uh and you know
this huge hoopla and all this kind of
stuff right okay that's Simon
Magus
well as far as scripture is concerned
and Real History Simon magus
stays there in Antioch Samaria he's just
that's
it that's the end of the
story but enter Justin
Martyr Justin
Martyr if you're not familiar was uh was
an
apologist uh in the in the tradition of
of Peter by the way giving a defense of
the Christian faith towards the Jews um
he argued at first that Simon maggus
came to
Rome in the in the reign of Claudius in
the year 40 now if you were following
along the chronology beforehand 40 is
very early on 7 to 10 years after
Pentecost uh very early on this would
even be around the time of Cornelius
right uh and so very early on so Justin
Martyr makes this claim that Simon Magus
went there and did all these signs and
wonders as in front of people and was
basically this huge heretic but everyone
in Rome treated him as a
god oh man you kind of look at that
you're like my goodness they even made a
statue to him and placed the statue on a
central island in the Tyber River and
the statue according to uh according to
Justin Martyr in chapter uh 26 of first
apology uh that they made this statue to
Simon Magus that said on the front
Deo Simon the holy God
right well that's an interesting
story it's an interesting story that
went uncontested for a long time a very
long
time additional extrapolations in the
generations after Justin wrote that
added all sorts of
things um the acts of Peter adds Peter
in Rome at that time refuting Simon
Magus there like their entire thing came
from Israel all the way to Rome and they
continue to battle it out um you know
adding amends combining Justin in Acts
chapter 8 and creating stories of the
acts of Peter in Rome um and disputing
there and Simon maggus even in
subsequent history takes on the role of
an arch heretic uh that Peter bests in
Rome like this this starts growing more
and more and more while Justin Martyr is
writing in the mid 2nd Century um the
acts of Peter is written towards the end
of the 2 Century but irenaeus and origin
and terlan and uh uus and Jerome and
others
really have this testimony of Justin
Martyr that there was this statue in
Rome indicating that Simon Magus went
there and was treated as a god well who
who better to go refute him than what we
see in Acts chapter 8 pet and so the
acts of Peter includes it wasn't just
Simon maggus there according to Justin
Martyr the acts of Peter it's apocryphal
writing adds in Peter was there
too and so that places all of them in
Rome in the year
40 completely against anything we read
in the book of Acts but this is what was
going on in the second
century and that is where the
entire concept of Peter having a 25y
year long Bishop of
Rome cuz he served from in this
fictional World 40 until 65 well what's
the problem with that the problem with
that is that entire dating that entire
story has its origin with the claim of
Justin
Martyr and the claim of Justin Martyr
that there was a
statue uh made of of Simon maggus in
Rome and set up on the is in the
Tyber uh with the inscription on the
front of Simon Deo Santo Simon the holy
God is
false you say well that's a pretty
significant claim yeah I
know in fact nobody really knew it was
false for a long long time it wasn't
until the year
1574 that the statue was
found and the statue had an inscription
that looked a lot like Simon deoo
meaning Simon the holy God but what it
actually said was Simon senko Deo fidio
sacrum meaning Simon senko is sacred to
God referring not to Simon Magus at all
but to a god named seenus
this means that Justin was
wrong Simon Magus was not in Rome in the
year 40 during the reign of
Claudius it wasn't about Simon maggus at
all in fact the entirety of his claim
was based on the presence of that
statue all I want you to hear this all
the later traditions of timing Peter's
role in Rome based their theories on
Justin being right about that
statue and that
misunderstanding affected the apocryphal
acts of Peter several others that I have
already mentioned before including
irenaeus origin tulan eus
Jerome that faithful fateful misread of
Latin inscription on that statue in
Rome took a myth and then turned it into
a legend
and then turned it into
history
unfortunately for those who base their
entire claims on a 25-year episcopacy of
Peter there date all of that based on
something that was wrong that Justin
Martyr
misunderstood and we didn't know that
until the 1500s when we dug up that
statue on the island in the Tyber
river that fateful misread affected
things for
all of history still
does Peter did not found the church in
Rome it was likely established by
unnamed persons and developed by Paul's
care as we see very clearly in his
letter to the church in
Rome and Paul made it very clear that he
does not build on someone else's
Foundation which means his primary role
in the church in Rome was his not
Peter's
Peter was not only not the First bishop
of Rome there weren't Bishops in the
first century
anywhere historically speaking that does
not happen until the 2
century and that only happens in spotty
areas at first and then it flows out and
becomes the way of it by the end of the
2 Century but the whole concept of a
monarchical bishop uh one Bishop per
City that that does not arise until the
2 Century we have not only zero evidence
of that in the first century we have a
mountain of evidence that it wasn't ever
that way that it was always a plurality
of Elders everywhere and we discussed
that in episode
6 Peter does not found the church in
Rome he was not the First bishop of Rome
Peter was not even in Rome before the
year 63 ad and he died shortly
thereafter this whole concept as Peter
is the rock on which the church is built
uh as you will no doubt know
um is is well in retrospect based on
Matthew 1618 it's based on tradition but
Matthew 1618 is used as the uh well may
I say misused as the basis for all of
this um meant to say things that it
isn't saying I'm not even going to get
into that argument today uh that has
been argued forever in a day it is the
most contested verse in all of scripture
um one because someone's coming in with
tradition and the other one's just
coming in going yeah the text doesn't
really say that at all um and tradition
Trump's interpretations in some people's
uh history so don't hardly have a way to
respond to that uh it is however been
used for the basis of the claim of
apostolic succession something about
which it Matthew 16:18 like all of the
scripture has nothing to say with
regards to some kind of um monarchical
uh Apostolic success of bishops from the
apostles forward that that's just pure
Fiction and Fantasy but let me just put
it this way let me let me seed the
argument for just a second let me say
that that all is about Peter being the
rock just as the Church of Rome puts
forward let's just say that that's the
correct interpretation that he alone
receives the keys that he is the the the
founder of the church that he is the one
on whom everything rests um that it goes
to him and him alone not the other
Apostles like it says in chapter 18 uh
immediately that it's just to put Peter
Peter alone and no one else that that he
is the sole figure on which everything
turns and Spins
right let's let's for sake of argument
put that forward here towards the
end that does not in any way get
transferred to the leaders of the church
in Rome
in fact it would thoroughly Prelude them
from any such claim as
Jerusalem absolutely has the claim for
succession of his rockness based on the
book of Acts and history and
everything in fact Antioch would have a
more significant claim even than
Rome even the churches of Northern Asia
Minor
that Peter writes to in First Peter have
a more significant historical claim that
Peter founded their
churches and his succession should come
through
them there is no such succession though
set up like that you say Well then why
Rome because Rome says so that's it it
is a circular reasoning based on what is
claimed to be an ultimate Authority and
that is the Church of Rome uh once the
church claims ultimate Authority that's
the end of it and that's why even
scripture can't be its Authority it has
to say it and it's true because it says
it and its history is such because it
says it it doesn't matter what scripture
and history say when they don't back up
those claims and not only not back them
up they are inconsistent with what
scripture and history both say it
doesn't
matter the reason I wanted to talk about
Peter is because his role in the early
church
is remarkable it is awesome and it is
absolutely overshadowed by the
misrepresentations and the lies about
his life and I want you to understand
that Peter is somebody that in my mind
reminds us very much about how human the
followers of Christ are still that we
too screw up we mess up we have all
sorts of problems even if even if we
were able to identify Christ properly we
the next breath could very easily deny
him like we could see that we do not
want Christ to lower himself to wash our
feet but then we find our need in our
correction and then we desire his
salvation all over the place I love
Peter I
love how human he
is I love how understandable he is to me
I love how he struggles with watching
where the Holy Spirit goes and then
finds it undeniable able that God is
saving the Gentiles even though he is
the Apostle to the Jews which by the way
also precludes his main founding of the
church in Rome but that's a whole
another
thing he still calls himself after all
these years a fellow
Elder and takes on the role of humility
that he earned through difficulty and
fallibility throughout his life and
simply says with one voice I think this
is what we can have a massive take away
from Peter on this he says towards the
end of his life God opposes the proud
and gives grace to the humble and I
think in following Peter's
example unlike those who claim to follow
in his
office that we should be humble just as
he
is we should not seek position for money
or filthy gain or any such thing but
instead walk humbly with our God as he
has encouraged us to be much of this
will come into play later as we delve
into some of the historical documents um
and that make reference to such things
and we will address them there but for
now that is the basis of the real Peter
and as we go forward next time we will
be together the real Paul the Apostle to
the Gentiles Lord's blessings to you all
[Music]
[Applause]